In a dream I was taking your class and I was asked to describe it to a friend. I said: It’s like Montessori School with big words. 

	Studio Art may be one of the best vehicles for teaching two particular thinking skills: Creative Thinking and Critical Thinking. To be crystal clear perhaps those two types of thinking should have working definitions.

	Creative Thinking is quite simply combining two or more ideas that have not been connected before. This type of thinking may remain abstract or become physical, concrete, and tangible. Creative Thinking does not come out of the blue or from a vacuum. Instead it comes from playing with what is already available. I view it as a process of addition or multiplication.
Critical Thinking, on the other hand, is about reducing calcified, over- determined ideas about ourselves and the world around us. Critical Thinking demands that we examine our biases and prejudices. Critical thinking can’t stop at “I like it.” or “I don’t like it.” At the very least it allows us to look at the cultural, commercial, and political circumstances that led to our likes or dislikes. Could we, in different circumstances, reverse our own likes and dislikes? If so, there is great power in understanding that mechanism.

	Both Creative and Critical Thinking have various parameters….from the personal, to the local, to the global. For example , if you connect two new ideas for the first time it may simply be new for you. Or it could be new for your community….or in some rare case for the world in general.
These types of thinking will not guarantee popularity or financial success. In fact, both of them can be outright confounding to people around you who may be operating on a kind of intellectual auto-pilot. However, in a world that is constantly changing, a world that necessitates flexibility and innovation, both of these types of thinking are valuable tools in your toolbox.

	My classes focus primarily on these types of thinking ( with an emphasis on Creative Thinking in particular) but will also examine and utilize other styles of thought as well. This class also operates on the assumption that doing, and making, can be valid components of thinking as well. The simple ideas outlined above may best be understood when put into action. Let’s get started making new things and thinking in new ways, re-combining the world and freeing ourselves from the programatic structures that stop us from discovering all that we can do or become.
